---
title: Sessions and Users
description: "Group tasks together into sessions and attach them to users."
---

A **task** is a single operation made by the user. _For example, a user sending a question to ChatGPT and receiving an answer is a task._

A **session** groups multiple tasks that happen in the same context. _For example, multiple messages in the same ChatGPT chat is a session._

A **user** is the end user of your LLM app. _For example, the human chatting with ChatGPT._

!!! info
    **Tasks, sessions and users are just abstractions.** They are meant to help you understand the context of a log. You can use them as you want.

    For example, 
    - A task can be _"Fetch documents in a database"_ for a RAG.
    - A session can be _"The code completions in a single file"_ for a coding copilot.
    - A user can be _"The microservice querying the API"_ for a question answering model.


## Tasks

### Inputs and Outputs

A **task** is made of an `input` and an **optional** `output`, which are text readable by humans. Think of them as the messages in a chat. 

On top of that, you can pass a `raw_input` and a `raw_output`. Those are the raw data that your LLM app received and produced. They are mostly meant for the developers of your LLM app.

### Metadata

To help you understand the context of a task, you can pass a **metadata** dict to your tasks. 

For example, the version of the model used, the generation time, the system prompt, the user_id, etc.

=== "Python"

    ```python 
    import phospho

    phospho.init()

    phospho.log(
        input="What is the meaning of life?",
        output="42",
        # Metadata
        raw_input={"chat_history": ...},
        metadata={
            "system_prompt": "You are a helpful assistant.",
            "version_id": "1.0.0",
            "generation_time": 0.1,
        },
    )
    ```

=== "Javascript"

    ```javascript
    import { phospho } from "phospho";

    phospho.init();

    phospho.log({
        input: "What is the meaning of life?",
        output: "42",
        // Metadata
        raw_input={"chat_history": ...},
        metadata={
            "system_prompt": "You are a helpful assistant.",
            "version_id": "1.0.0",
            "generation_time": 0.1,
        },
    });
    ```


The metadata is a dictionary that can contain any key-value pair. We recommend to stick to str keys and str or float values.

Note that the output is optional, but the input is required.

#### Special metadata keys

- `system_prompt`: The prompt used to generate the output. It will be displayed separately in the UI.
- `version_id`: The version of the app. Used for [AB testing](/docs/analytics/ab-tests).
- `user_id`: The id of the user. Used for [user analytics](#users).


### Tasks are not just calls to LLMs

A task can be a call to a LLM. But it can also be something completely different. 

For example, a task can be a call to a database, or the result of a complex chain of thought. 

Tasks are an abstraction that you can use as you want.

### Task Id

By default, when logging, a task id is automatically generated for you. 

Generating your own task id is useful to attach user feedback later on (on this topic, see [User Feedback](/docs/guides/user-feedback)).

## Sessions

If you're using phospho in a conversational app such a chatbot, group tasks together into sessions.

- Sessions are easier to read for humans.
- They improve evaluations and event detections by providing context.
- They help you understand the user journey.

### Session Id

To create sessions, pass a `session_id` when logging. 

The session id can be any string. However, we recommend to use a UUID generated by a random hash function. We provide a helper function to generate a session id.

=== "Python"

    ```python
    session_id = phospho.new_session()

    phospho.log(
        input="What is the meaning of life?",
        output="42",
        session_id=session_id,
    )
    ```

=== "Javascript"

    ```javascript
    const sessionId = phospho.newSession();

    phospho.log({
        input: "What is the meaning of life?",
        output: "42",
        sessionId: sessionId,
    });
    ```

=== "Langchain"

    ```python
    import phospho
    from phospho.integrations import PhosphoLangchainCallbackHandler

    session_id = phospho.new_session()

    response = retrieval_chain.invoke(
        "Chain input", 
        config={"callbacks": [
            # Pass the session_id to the callback
            PhosphoLangchainCallbackHandler(session_id=session_id)
        ]}
    )
    ```


### Session insights

Sessions are useful for insights about short term user behavior. 
- Monitor for how long a user chats with your LLM app before disconnecting
- Compute the average number of messages per session
- Discover what kind of messages ends a session.

## Users

Find out how specific users interact with your LLM app by logging the user id.

To do so, attach tasks and sessions to a `user_id` when logging. The user id can be any string. 

=== "Python"

    ```python 
    phospho.log(
        input="What is the meaning of life?",
        output="42",
        user_id="roger@gmail.com",
    )
    ```

=== "Javascript"

    ```javascript
    phospho.log({
        input: "What is the meaning of life?",
        output: "42",
        user_id: "roger@gmail.com",
    });
    ```

User analytics are available in the tabs Insights/Users. 
- Discover aggregated metrics (number of tasks, average session duration, etc.)
- Access the tasks and sessions of a user by clicking on the corresponding row.

Monitoring users helps you discover power users of your app, abusive users, or users who are struggling with your LLM app.